# Halifax Explosion 1917 #

# hour 1 #

## act 1 – introduction ##

A large ship sits anchored as the sun sets over a forested island in the
background. Zoom in to a well-lit window on the ship's bridge. Inside,
the ship's 41 officers and crew sit in the saloon, speaking to each
other in French. It is tense. The diminutive captain **Aimé Le Médec**
(38) sits sternly at the head of the table. One Canadian sits with the
rest, but is clearly alone. He does not understand or speak French.
Desaturated colours imply we are looking at the past.

Overlay: *morning, 6 Dec, 1917.*

The same ship is on fire in a busy harbour. It glides towards the piers
in industrial area of a city and people gather on shore to watch as the
ship runs into a pier. Others come to the windows of their houses,
businesses and schools to look down the hill at the burning ship in the
harbour. Over the shoulder of a crowd on shore, a massive explosion
erupts from the ship, and the screen flashes to white. A second later,
part of the city is flattened; houses are reduced to rubble and
foundations, factories and schools left in pieces. The devastation is
total.

Weeks earlier: afternoon, November, 1917. Aimé Le Médec stands quietly,
outdoors on the bridge of the *Mont-Blanc* while it is being prepared,
docked at a pier in the Hudson River in Manhattan. Dirty, hard-working
stevedores move in the background with tools and wood; the old-looking
ship is being prepared for something.

Video colour saturates, indicating that we are now in the present. The
same pier in Manhattan is empty. There is no ship, no stevedores, and no
activity. Cut to the container piers of Newark Bay, extending almost
infinitely in either direction, with a massive container ship being
loaded by gantry cranes. It is clear that things have changed, and yet
they have not. Our host enters the frame introducing himself, and
explains that this is where our story begins one hundred years ago.

Close with a brief montage of large chemical plants.

## act 2 – american chemicals and uk shipbuilding ##

Continue montage of large chemical plants along the water in New Jersey,
across the water from Manhattan. Dow Chemical facilities in Midland MI
and Texas City TX (formerly Union Carbide). duPont in Delaware City, DE.
duPont Chambers Works Complex in Deepwater NJ. Hundreds of hectares of
industrial wasteland fill the screen. Tanks, pipe, and billowing smoke
loom above us.

The host explains that while millions of soldiers died in European Great
War trenches, American chemical producers popped up like mushrooms to
feed the war with raw explosives and chemical weapons. The profits were
hard to resist. From the start of the war to 1917, US production
increased 2100%. The well known North American chemical producers of
today were either born, or came of age at this time: du Pont, Dow,
Monsanto, Union Carbide. Every “tin-pot” sea-worthy ship in the western
world was pressed into service to bring such deadly chemicals from these
manufacturers across the Atlantic.

Enter *SS* *Mont-Blanc*. A fly-through animation of the ship sitting at
the Manhattan pier introduces it, and its specs are described by the
host: it's 97m long, 14m wide and sits 6.35m deep in the water. With a
steel hull and steam powered, it was built for the worldwide cargo
trade. Its holds could fit 6000 cubic metres of cargo – about the volume
of 2 olympic-size swimming pools. Was there anything special about this
ship?

Middlesbrough UK. Our host rides the Transporter Bridge across the river
Tees to the centre of the massive British shipbuilding industry at the
dawn of the 20^th^ century. The Transporter is more like a gondola than
a bridge – carrying cars and buses as well as passengers across the
River Tees. At the southern foot of the bridge is the site of Sir
Raylton Dixon and Co., as well as steel and coal companies which
supported shipwrights of the golden age of steel ships.

The world was already globalized in 1899 when Mont-Blanc was built. Our
host tells us that hundreds of ships were built by British ship builders
during the late 19th and early 20th centuries to foster a booming
steam-ship trade. Right here, below the Transporter Bridge, 459 ships
had been made by Sir Raylton Dixon and Co. before Mont-Blanc. Many more
ships were constructed all along the three rivers of England's
industrial northeast: Tees, Wear and Tyne. At the top of their game, UK
shipbuilders supplied merchant ships like Mont-Blanc to companies and
governments around the world. Many were built to cookie-cutter designs;
Mont-Blanc was one of hundreds of merchant ships built to a standard
design: the “three-island” steamer.

Cut to our host standing on the steamer *S.S. Jeremiah O'Brien in* San
Francisco Bay. He demonstrates the elements of the ship's design which
are very similar to the *Mont-Blanc*, like the thousands of merchant
ships built in the early 20^th^ century.

We return to 1917 to see captain Le Médec on the bridge of *Mont-Blanc*
with the stevedores behind.

## act 3 – loading the bomb ##

The ship is now a hundred metres from the coast, and a rural landscape
in the background indicates that we're not in Manhattan anymore.

Overlay: *Gravesend Bay, Brooklyn, NY.*

The stevedores now have white linen covering their shoes and are walking
slowly and carefully, moving heavy boxes and kegs onto the ship.

Overlay: *30 Nov 1917*.

Men move a heavy (circa 200kg) barrel onto a derrick's hook to be lifted
onto the ship. Cutaway to the inside of a single barrel showing the
yellow powder, covered in water, inside.

Title overlay: *picric acid*.

Our host explains that picric acid makes up four fifths of
*Mont-Blanc*'s cargo *–* 2170 tonnes – 10 times the weight of the Statue
of Liberty. Picric acid was the go-to explosive powder for French shell
manufacturers, powerful and quick to manufacture. We see another
container cutaway, showing a crystalline yellow power.

Overlay: *TNT.*

The new “wonder” powder being adopted by the USA and UK for ordnance
during World War I, TNT is a little less powerful than picric acid, but
more stable and easier to control. 181 tonnes of TNT is loaded aboard
*Mont-Blanc*.

One last case from the 28,000-odd packages being placed aboard. We see a
cutaway into the container once more, the case containing a fluffy white
fibrous substance.

Overlay: *guncotton*.

Guncotton is a propellant – the material that explodes in the gun
barrel, pushing a heavy shell toward a target up to 7 kilometres away,
at over 600 metres per second (that's 2160km/h).

Back in the present day, our host introduces us to **Pierre Pelletier**,
an explosives expert with many years of experience working for a major
powder supplier to the Canada's *Department of National Defence*.

Pelletier says that, while most people refer to *Mont-Blanc* as a
“munitions” ship, it was nothing of the kind. There were few munitions
aboard: just a few cases of shells for the ship's two defensive guns.
90% of the cargo was high-explosive in raw form. However, the confined
and hermetically-sealed hold of the ship was, in a way, like a massive
shell.

With Pelletier's guidance we explode picric acid, TNT and guncotton –
showing us their relative energies and effects.

Back in 1917, the ship is still being loaded. Le Médec steps into a dim
office of the British Admiralty to receive his sailing orders.

## act 4 – convoy ##

Le Médec sits down at a desk. Commander Coates, head of the convoy
office of the British Navy in New York, asks some curt questions of the
French captain through a translator: his ship's condition, size, and
most importantly: its speed. Our host explains that the British Royal
Navy controlled transatlantic shipping late in the war, subjecting it to
a defensive convoy system. U-boats were sinking Allied ships left and
right. The French lost 25% of their merchant fleet to German attacks
early in 1917 and were desperate to get materials across the ocean by
any means possible.

An animated overhead view shows an example convoy as the host describes:
10-20 ships set up in a grid, with merchant ships at the centre and
defensive naval ships around the outside, such as destroyers. The convoy
would zig-zag across the Atlantic together to make it hard for U-boats
to track their position. In the event of an attack, naval ships would be
ready to counter. The convoy system worked, and it worked well. When it
was finally adopted for all Allied shipping in mid-1917, losses to
U-boats dropped considerably.

Coates explains to Le Médec that his ship, with a maximum speed of 7
knots (13km/h), isn't fast enough to keep up with the convoys leaving
New York biweekly for Liverpool UK. *Mont-Blanc* should depart for
Halifax, Nova Scotia – the main Canadian naval port on the east coast –
to see if it might be able to join a slower convoy leaving from there.
The convoy office appears not to know for sure that a Halifax convoy
would be slow enough for the *Mont-Blanc* either. Le Médec protests.
He'll be a sitting duck for U-boats between New York and Halifax along
the coast, not even sure that he'll be able to join a convoy once he
arrives.

As Le Médec turns to leave the office, Coates gives him an envelope. Le
Médec: “What's this?” Coates explains that the contents of the envelope
are top secret: *Mont-Blanc's* route across the Atlantic, alone, to be
opened only if it can't keep up with a convoy. Le Médec knows that his
fate is sealed, though he turns out to be completely wrong about what
danger lies in his future.

As we return to views of the ship, the host wonders why the British
convoy office would put a ship at risk like this. The cargo is worth
\$65.5million US dollars in today's value – no trifle for governments of
the day. The picric acid aboard would fill a few million shells and if
lost, the cargo would take months to replace.

Overlay: *afternoon, 1 Dec, 1917*

Mont-Blanc is being loaded with barrels of one final material. Again, we
see a barrel cut-away to reveal a colourless liquid.

Overlay: *chlorobenzene.*

This highly flammable liquid is an industrial solvent. It's also the
feedstock for producing many chemicals, including DDT. There was a
process for making picric acid using chlorobenzene as feedstock
discovered early in 1917. These barrels are likely intended for the
chemical makers of France for producing the explosive. The last of 494
barrels is stacked and lashed onto the deck of the ship.

We zoom out to an animated ship stacked with barrels and packed full,
sitting heavy in the bay.

Le Médec does his final checks from the ship's middle bridge, asking his
1^st^ officer **Jean-Baptiste Glotin** (33) to ready the crew for
departure. Light falls. The windlasses bring anchors up, and
*Mont-Blanc* steams alone out of the Port of New York into the dark
December Atlantic. Only the harbour lights indicate the way.

## act 5 – across the gulf of maine ##

Over the shoulder of Le Médec, darkness envelops the ship as it heads
out the Ambrose Channel, past the sandy bars of Coney Island NY, Sandy
Hook NJ and Breezy Point NY. The winds and waves increase, pushing the
steel hull around violently. Working over 22 years at sea, it's not the
weather that concerns Le Médec.

Cut to the estuary of River Medway, UK in the present day. Our host
stands in the remote mudflats next to the rusted, fractured hull of
*UB-122*, one of the U-boats which was a thorn in the side of Allied
shipping during the Great War. It's just a rusting shell now, but the
German U-boat fleet was the main balancing force against the almost
unbeatable Royal Navy. Picking off ships invisibly by torpedo, just 375
U-boats sank over 5,000 Allied merchant ships.

They would prove to be a further menace as their technology improved
into World War II. Cut to Chicago IL, where our host stands next to
another U-boat hull, this one intact. U-505's “Type IX” design was built
for World War II, but based on the long-range submarines of the Great
War. Representative of the losing side of both wars, not surprisingly,
it is one of very few U-boats which has been kept intact.

Our host walks through the ship, giving us a sense of its size and
telling us about range and speed. An animation shows a sample attack. A
submarine sitting 100m below the waterline, moves into torpedo range of
a solo merchant ship. The submarine fires a torpedo, hitting its target.
The U-boat rises to the surface to finish the job with its deck-mounted
guns. The merchant ship sinks rapidly, never having a chance.

This is what Le Médec fears as he heads northeast towards Halifax.
U-boats are a menace across the North Atlantic but in Dec 1917 not a
single German submarine had yet been sighted off the North American east
coast. But everyone knows that they're coming. It's only a matter of
time.

Time lapse animation of Mont-Blanc's bow shows light rising and falling
over several days, with the sandy coastline of Long Island, Connecticut
and Bar Harbor disappearing from view and then the rocky coastline of
Nova Scotia entering.

Despite heavy weather across the Gulf of Maine and the ever-present
U-boat threat, *Mont-Blanc* reaches Halifax safely. As the ship
approaches the city, a time-worn schooner pulls alongside and we see a
man climb up a rope ladder from the schooner onto *Mont-Blanc.* Despite
climbing several metres up from one ship to another over rough seas, the
man appears to be fearless and experienced. It is below freezing, and he
is not wearing gloves.

Halifax harbour pilot **Francis Mackey** (44), once aboard, introduces
himself to Le Médec, who shakes his hand. It is immediately clear that
Le Médec doesn't speak much English, and Mackey doesn't speak much
French.

In the wheelhouse, Mackey helps Le Médec to guide his ship into the
harbour, using basic commands and hand-signals in light of the language
barrier. *Mont-Blanc* stops at the naval examination anchorage, just
outside the harbour. The ship is boarded once more, by a man coming
aboard from a Royal Canadian Naval gunboat.

Examining officer **Terrence Freeman** looks at the ship's cargo
manifest, raising eyebrows just slightly when he realizes how much raw,
high explosive is below his feet. Mackey, sensing the risk of guiding a
large ship up the narrow channel, asks Freeman for special transit
permission – that all other ships will have to wait until the
dangerously laden Mont-Blanc has reached its final anchorage. Freeman
denies the request – and worse, tells Mackey and Le Médec that they are
going to have to wait until morning to enter the harbour. It's 4:30pm
and the defensive submarine nets are closed for the evening.
*Mont-Blanc* will be exposed to U-boat attacks for one more night.

Cut back to the scene at the top of the hour. The ship's 41 officers and
crew sit in the saloon, speaking to each other in French. It is tense.
Le Médec sits sternly at the head of the table. Mackey sits with the
rest, but is clearly alone. He does not understand or speak French.

# hour 2 #

## act 6 – into the harbour ##

Helicopter view of Halifax harbour today. Shaped like an hourglass, the
city sits on the western shore of the narrowest portion of the harbour.
The Narrows, a short section of harbour connecting the expansive basin
to the north to the Atlantic to the south is only 300m wide.

